>> Sreenivasan: GLOBAL SEA LEVEL
RISE WENT UP 50% BETWEEN 1994
AND 2014, ACCORDING TO A STUDY
PUBLISHED THIS WEEK IN THE
JOURNAL "NATURE CLIMATE CHANGE."
IN 2014 ALONE, IT WENT UP AN
EIGHTH OF AN INCH.
BUT IF YOU WANT TO SEE WHAT
THOSE NUMBERS ACTUALLY MEAN,
TAKE A LOOK AT THE INCREASING
NUMBER OF FLOODING EVENTS ALONG
THE EAST COAST OF THE UNITED
STATES.
THE NONPROFIT CLIMATE CENTRAL
LOOKED AT 90 CITIES FROM
MASSACHUSETTS TO FLORIDA.
INCLUDED IN THAT LIST ARE
ATLANTIC CITY AND OTHER TOWNS ON
THE NEW JERSEY SHORE.
I RECENTLY SPOKE TO THE REPORTER
OF THAT STORY, JOHN UPTON.
YOU WORKED ON THIS FOR SIX
MONTHS; WHY FOCUS ON ATLANTIC
CITY?
I MEAN, ATLANTIC CITY, TO A LOT
OF US, THINK... WE THINK
CASINOS, THE TRUMP TAJ MAHAL, ET
CETERA, ET CETERA.
BUT THERE'S A LOT MORE PEOPLE
THAT LIVE THERE.
>> SO, THE CLIMATE CENTRAL
SCIENTISTS ACTUALLY CONDUCTED
ANALYSIS.
THEY LOOKED AT HUNDREDS OF U.S.
COASTAL CITIES AND EXAMINED THE
INCREASE THAT ARE EXPECTED AND
THE FLOOD RISKS IN EACH OF
THOSE.
THEY IDENTIFIED ABOUT 90 THAT
FACE VERY SHARP INCREASES IN...
IN FLOODING RISKS.
A LOT OF THESE CITIES TEND TO BE
BUILT ALONG BAYS, ALONG RIVERS,
NEAR THE MOUTHS OF ESTUARIES, SO
THEY HAVE A VERY LOW TOPOGRAPHY.
AND THE HIGHEST-RISK ONES TEND
TO BE CLUSTERED ALONG THE MID-
ATLANTIC.
AND ATLANTIC CITY SIMPLY SHOWED
UP AS BEING ONE OF THE CITIES
THAT FACES THE GREATEST RISKS.
BUT IN ADDITION TO THAT, IT ALSO
HAS THIS GREAT INEQUITY AMONG
THE RICH AND THE POOR THAT...
IT'S A CITY THAT'S IN ECONOMIC
DECLINE RIGHT NOW, SO I WANTED
TO EXAMINE HOW... HOW THEY'RE
ADAPTING TO... TO THE CHANGES
IN... IN SEA LEVEL THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU ALSO TOOK
VIDEO IN YOUR ARTICLE.
I KNOW YOU SPENT SIX MONTHS
WORKING ON THIS PROJECT.
THERE'S A PIECE OF SOUND THAT WE
HAVE FROM ONE OF THE RESIDENTS
THERE.
LET'S TAKE A LISTEN TO HER.
>> IT WASN'T THAT BAD.
IT WASN'T BAD WHEN YOU FIRST
MOVED IN HERE.
IT WAS EIGHT INCHES BEFORE.
ANOTHER TEN INCHES, IT'S GOING
TO BE IN THE HOUSE.
RIGHT NOW, WE'RE GOING TO TRY TO
PUT A WASHER AND DRIER UP.
IT'S ALL REPLACEABLE, BUT IT'S
VERY HARD AND VERY INCONVENIENT.
AND MONEY, YOU KNOW.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS NOT
AFTER HURRICANE SANDY.
THIS WAS AFTER WHAT KIND OF
WEATHER?
>> THIS... WHEN THERE'S A... A
FULL MOON OR A NEW MOON, YOU GET
HIGHER TIDES THAN AT NORMAL
TIMES.
JUST YESTERDAY, I WAS RETWEETING
SOME PICTURES FROM THIS STREET,
ARIZONA AVENUE, ATLANTIC AVENUE,
THAT WERE FLOODING SIMPLY
BECAUSE THERE WAS A HIGH TIDE
ASSOCIATED WITH A FULL MOON.
AT THE SAME TIME, THERE WAS A
STORM.
THE STORMS PUSH WATER FROM THE
COAST TOWARDS THE LAND.
SO, YOU HAVE THE TIDE ACTUALLY
RISING UP IN THE STREET, COMING
THROUGH THE STORM WATER DRAINS.
AT THE SAME TIME AS THAT, YOU
HAVE HEAVY RAIN-- OR EVEN ANY
RAIN-- AND THE RAIN CAN'T DRAIN
AWAY.
SO, WHAT YOU GET IS VERY
SUBSTANTIAL FLOODING IN SOME OF
THESE NEIGHBORHOODS THAT ARE
BUILT ALONG BAYS IN ATLANTIC
CITY.
AND THAT WAS THE CASE IN THE
VIDEO THAT YOU JUST SAW.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS IS JUST
PEOPLE GETTING USED TO THIS AS A
FACT OF LIFE ON-- IF THE
CIRCUMSTANCES ARE RIGHT,
BASICALLY A FULL MOON AND A
HEAVY RAIN OR STORM, AND IT'S
OVER.
>> THIS CAN HAPPEN... THIS IS
HAPPENING MONTHLY.
THIS IS HAPPENING ALL THE TIME.
THE RESIDENTS HAVE THEIR OWN
SYSTEMS FOR DEALING WITH IT.
THEY ALERT EACH OTHER WHEN THEY
SEE THE WATERS RISING.
THEY... THEY'VE ALL LOST CARS.
THEY... THEY MOVE THEIR CARS.
THEY PARK THEM IN A GARAGE IN
THE DOWNTOWN AREA OR ON HIGHER
LAND.
THEY PUT THEIR FURNITURE UP ON
ON BLOCKS.
THEY TAKE PRECAUTIONS BECAUSE
THEY'VE ALL EXPERIENCED SERIOUS
FLOODS, AND SO THEY JUST TAKE
MEASURES TO... TO MINIMIZE
THE... THE IMPACT EACH TIME IT
FLOODS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES
THIS DO TO THE PROPERTY VALUE?
I'M IMAGINING RIGHT NOW, AFTER I
SEE THIS STORY, OR AT LEAST
PEOPLE WHO KNOW WHAT THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR, I'M NOT GOING TO
BUY A HOUSE THAT'S ON THAT
STREET.
AND SO, THE PEOPLE THAT ARE
THERE, IF THEY CAN'T SELL IT...
>> AND SO, IT'S NOT ONLY THAT
IT'S UNAPPEALING BECAUSE IT'S
FLOODING, BUT ATLANTIC CITY IS
IN SUCH SERIOUS ECONOMIC
DECLINE.
IT HAD 5% OF THE POPULATION
LEAVE JUST OVER THE LAST DECADE.
ALL OF THE JOBS ARE DRYING UP.
THE TECH SPACE IS DRYING UP.
NOBODY WANTS TO BE BUYING
PROPERTY IN ATLANTIC CITY, LET
ALONE IN THESE REALLY VULNERABLE
AREAS.
AND OVER THE LAST 12 MONTHS, TWO
HOUSES IN THIS ONE-BLOCK
STREET THAT I WENT TO, ARIZONA
AVENUE, TWO OF THEM HAVE SOLD
FOR LESS THAN $35,000 EACH.
AND WHAT THAT MEANS IS THAT
RESIDENTS WHO ARE SOME OUT OF
WORK, ALL OF THEIR EQUITY IS
TIED UP IN THEIR HOUSE.
THEY NOW HAVE NO EQUITY LEFT.
THEY CAN'T SELL THEIR HOUSE.
THEY DON'T HAVE WORK IN ATLANTIC
CITY.
THEY WANT TO MOVE, BUT THEY
CAN'T SELL THEIR PROPERTY.
THEY... THEY FEEL VERY TRAPPED.
SOME OF THEM REALLY EXPRESSED
SOME VERY STRONG EMOTIONS TO ME.
THEY FEEL STUCK.
>> Sreenivasan: ISN'T THE ARMY
CORPS OF ENGINEERS WORKING IN A
DIFFERENT PART OF THE SAME TOWN
OR THE SAME CITY TO TRY TO SHORE
UP THE DEFENSES TO DOWNTOWN?
>> SURE.
SO, USING SANDY RECOVERY FUNDS,
THE ARMY CORPS IS ENGAGING TWO
FAIRLY MAJOR PROJECTS QUITE
CLOSE TO ARIZONA AVENUE, CLOSE
TO THESE, YOU KNOW, WORKING-
CLASS NEIGHBORHOODS IN ATLANTIC
CITY.
ONE IS IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA.
THAT'S A BIG SEAWALL THAT'S
BEING BUILT TO PROTECT THE
CASINOS AND THE DOWNTOWN AREA.
THEY'RE ALSO ABOUT TO SPEND TENS
OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS ON SAND
DUNES TO PROTECT COASTAL...
OCEANFRONT HOMES, OFTEN COSTING
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS, OFTEN
OCCUPIED ONLY DURING THE SUMMER.
THESE ARE HOLIDAY HOUSES.
SO, THEY'RE GETTING PROTECTIONS
EVEN THOUGH THEY'VE ACTUALLY
SUED TO TRY TO PREVENT THE
PROJECT BECAUSE THEY DON'T WANT
TO LOSE THEIR VIEWS.
SO, ALL AROUND THESE RESIDENTS,
THEY CAN SEE THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT WORKING TO ALLEVIATE
FLOODING RISKS.
BUT THESE WORKING-CLASS
RESIDENTS OF... OF ATLANTIC CITY
ARE GETTING NOTHING.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU FOCUSED
ON ATLANTIC CITY, BUT YOU ALSO
HAVE AN INTERACTIVE MAP ON THE
SITE-- JUST VERY INTERESTING--
AND IT POINTS OUT HOW THIS IS
HAPPENING IN DIFFERENT COASTAL
POPULATIONS ALL OVER THE
COUNTRY.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, IF YOU KIND OF
CLICK THROUGH AND YOU SEE KIND
OF MYRTLE BEACH IN SOUTH
CAROLINA, AND YOU HAVE THIS SORT
OF BAR GRAPH THAT TALKS ABOUT
WHAT THE FLOOD RISKS ARE GOING
TO BE NOW AND THEN, YOU KNOW,
20 OR 30 YEARS FROM NOW.
ALMOST IN EVERY ONE OF THOSE
PLACES, OBVIOUSLY, IT'S GETTING
WORSE.
>> YEAH, AND THE... THE AREAS
THAT ARE BUILT ALONG BAYS, THE
AREAS THAT ARE BUILT ALONG
RIVERS, THESE WORKING-CLASS
NEIGHBORHOODS, THEY FACE THE
GREATEST RISKS.
AND, YOU KNOW, WE HAVE TO BE
SERIOUS HERE.
WE HAVE TO STOP PUTTING SO MUCH
POLLUTION INTO THE ATMOSPHERE.
THAT'S CAUSING THE SEAS TO RISE.
AND WE NEED TO TAKE MEASURES
TO... TO STOP THAT.
BUT EVEN IF WE... EVEN IF WE
STOP POLLUTING THE ATMOSPHERE
TOMORROW, WE'VE LOCKED IN SO
MUCH SEA LEVEL RISE AT THIS
POINT, IT'S SUCH A SLOW-MOVING
DISASTER THAT WE'VE BEGUN, THAT
WE'RE STILL GOING TO SEE THE
RISKS INCREASING VERY
DRAMATICALLY IN A NUMBER OF
THESE CITIES AROUND THE U.S. AND
ALSO AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW IS A
HOUSE INSURABLE IN A
NEIGHBORHOOD LIKE THIS?
SO, WHEN YOU LOOK AT DOWNTOWN
MIAMI, THESE CONDOS ARE VERY
EXPENSIVE, AND THEY'RE THERE.
AND HERE, WE HAVE A SITUATION
THAT 30 YEARS FROM NOW, ALL THE
PROJECTIONS SAY IT'S ACTUALLY
GOING TO GET WORSE.
SO, IF I'M IN A 30-YEAR
MORTGAGE: A, WHO'S GIVING ME
THAT MORTGAGE; AND THEN, WHAT'S
THE INSURANCE... WHO'S GIVING ME
THE INSURANCE?
>> THE ONLY REASON THAT YOU CAN
GET INSURANCE IN THESE AREAS IS
THAT THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS
ALWAYS SUBSIDIZED, HAS ALWAYS
PROVIDED FLOOD INSURANCE.
IT'S PROMOTED AND ENCOURAGED AND
EFFECTIVELY SUBSIDIZED HOUSE-
BUILDING, URBAN DEVELOPMENT,
HOME-BUYING, IN... IN VERY
VULNERABLE COASTAL AREAS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WE'RE ALL
PAYING FOR IT.
>> WE'RE ALL PAYING FOR IT.
THE... THE FLOOD INSURANCE
PROGRAM IS CURRENTLY MORE THAN
$20 BILLION IN ARREARS.
AND SO, THERE HAVE BEEN ATTEMPTS
TO REFORM THESE FLOOD INSURANCE
PROGRAMS.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT WHAT
CONGRESS DISCOVERED IS THAT ONCE
YOU TAKE THESE SUBSIDIES AWAY,
THE HOMEOWNERS, THE VOTERS
SUDDENLY SEE VERY SUDDEN AND
SUBSTANTIAL INCREASES IN... IN
THEIR INSURANCE RATES, AND
THEY'RE SUDDENLY PAYING WHAT THE
MARKET WOULD... WOULD HAVE TO
OFFER.
AND THAT'S VERY UNPOPULAR.
IT'S A HARD THING TO CHANGE NOW
THAT WE'VE GOT THAT IN PLACE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, THE
REPORT IS ON CLIMATE CENTRAL'S
WEB SITE.
JOHN UPTON, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US.
>> IT'S GREAT TO BE HERE.
THANKS FOR YOUR INTEREST.